Square Root Number Line Theorem (formerly known as the Mine Theorem):

Author: Jilla Shrikanta (14 yrs.)

Abstract: In this paper, we present an observation on the geometric construction and measurement of square roots on a number line using the right-angle triangle method. We show that to represent the square root of n on a number line using this method, we need to take sqrt(n+1) units of length for the hypotenuse of the right-angled triangle. We also provide a theorem that can be used to determine how many units (inches) are needed for a particular root. Furthermore, we show that the number of integers between certain highlighted roots can be calculated using a simple formula. The method we describe is based on the ancient mathematical theorem of Pythagoras and the geometric construction of the square root of a number, which has been used by various cultures throughout history.

Introduction: The geometric construction of the square root of a number is an ancient method that has been used by various cultures throughout history. In this method, a right-angled triangle is drawn with one leg having a length of 1 unit and the other leg having a length of sqrt(n) units, where n is the number whose square root is to be represented on the number line. The hypotenuse of the triangle can then be used to mark the position of sqrt(n) on the number line. In this paper, we present an observation on this method and provide a theorem that can be used to determine the number of units (inches) needed for a particular root.

Theorem: To represent the square root of n on a number line using the right-angle triangle method, we need to take sqrt(n+1) units of length for the hypotenuse of the right-angled triangle.

Observation: By using the above theorem, we can determine how many units (inches) are needed for a particular root. For example, √2 requires 1 inch, √3 requires sqrt (4) = 2 inches, √5 requires 2 inches, √10 requires 3 inches, and so on.

Furthermore, we have observed that the number of integers between certain highlighted roots can be calculated using a simple formula. For example, between √2 and √5, there are 2 integers (2 multiplied by 1 = 2), between √5 and √10, there are 4 integers (2 multiplied by 2 = 4), between √10 and √17, there are 6 integers (2 multiplied by 3 = 6), and between √17 and √26, there are 8 integers (2 multiplied by 4 = 8).

Conclusion: In this paper, we have presented an observation on the geometric construction and measurement of square roots on a number line using the right-angle triangle method, now named the "Square Root Number Line Theorem." We have shown that this method is based on the ancient mathematical theorem of Pythagoras and the geometric construction of the square root of a number. Our observation provides a theorem that can be used to determine the number of units (inches) needed for a particular root and a formula for calculating the number of integers between certain highlighted roots.
